---
title:  "U-Net : Convolutional Networks for Biomedical Image Segmentation"
author: spandan
categories: [ Paper Analysis, Deep Learning, Medical Image Segmentation ]
tags: [cover, intro]
description: "Medical Image Segmentation with small datasets"
featured: false
hidden: false
layout: post
image: assets/images/research/unetcover.png
comments: false
---

This <a href="https://arxiv.org/pdf/1505.04597v1.pdf">paper</a> by Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox from the University of Freiburg, Germany. This architecture was the backbone of the winning solution of the ISBI 2015 cell tracking challenge. Quoting the paper, "Moreover,  the  network  is  fast.  Segmentationof a 512x512 image takes less than a second on a recent GPU". 

In the Introductory part of the paper, we see the concern that this paper aims to address. Deep Neural networks, that provide state of the art solutions to most visual recogition tasks, they are data hungry. It requres large numbers of sample training data points to optimize their parameters. Furthermore, we are reminded of the fact that the problem of semantic segmentation and object localization is a more complex problem than image classification. 

Let us take the example of biomedical image segmentation as shown in the cover of this post. There are several difficulties one faces. Apart from the inherent fact that every pixel must have a label, we are limited in the number od images available in biomedical tasks. Detailed analysis of the paper by  **Ciresan, D.C., Gambardella, L.M., Giusti, A., Schmidhuber, J.: "Deep neural net-works segment neuronal membranes in electron microscopy images" at NIPS, 2012** that labels each pixel by using a sliding window/ a local patch/ a neighbourhood of the pixel as input. This network localizes well. Number of random patches that can be taken is much larger in order than the number of images available and hence we have achieved an augmentation of sorts using such patches. Drawbacks include speed, as for each pixel we have to pass the coresponding patch through the network. The next drawback mentioned needs attention. The size of the patches become a critical choice. Larger patches followed by subsequent maxpooling may abstract the target pixel information compromising localization while smaller patches pass little neighbourhood information to the network. **This is the tradeoff between localization accuracy and the use of context.**

This paper claims to propose a modified "fully convolutional network". Let us have a look at the architecture before we describe it.

[The U-NET architecture Source : https://arxiv.org/pdf/1505.04597v1.pdf](https://i.imgur.com/6Hnj9hh.png)
